---
layout: post
title: JSON WEB TOKENS (JWT)
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

# JSON

JSON stands for JavaScript Object Notation that is used to represent data in a structured way based on JavaScript object Suntax.

<!--more-->

Example of JSON:
~~~

{
  "squadName": "Super hero squad",
  "homeTown": "Metro City",
  "formed": 2016,
  "secretBase": "Super tower",
  "active": true,
  "members": [  
    {
      "name": "Molecule Man",
      "age": 29,
      "secretIdentity": "Dan Jukes",
      "powers": [
        "Radiation resistance",
        "Turning tiny",
        "Radiation blast"
      ]
    }
  ]
}

~~~

## JSON Web Token(s)

JWT are used to represent claims between two parties. 
Claims can be related to any business process, but are typically used to represent an identity and it's associations: for example that the user logged in
is part of a group or an admin.

Basically a JWT contains three things and has this structure:

~~~

aaaaa.bbbbb.ccccc

where aaaaa, bbbbb and ccccc are different JSON objects that are encoded in base64URL fomart and separated by a dot (.).

~~~

### Breaking Down a JWT

#### Header

The first part of a JWT represented in the example above by aaaaa is the header.
The header tells us what type of a token it is and the algorithm being used.

Example: 
~~~

{
  "alg": "HS256",
  "typ": "JWT"
}

~~~

The header is then base64URL encoded to form the first part of the JWT. In our case the exaple above gives the following

~~~

ewogICJhbGciOiAiSFMyNTYiLAogICJ0eXAiOiAiSldUIgp9

~~~

#### Payload

This is the second part represented by bbbbb in the example. This is where the claims are.  Claims are statements about an entity (
typically, the user) and additional data. A claim could be that the user is an admin.

Example: 
~~~

{
  "sub": "1234567890",
  "name": "John Doe",
  "admin": true
}

~~~

The base64URL encoded payload looks like this

~~~

ewogICJzdWIiOiAiMTIzNDU2Nzg5MCIsCiAgIm5hbWUiOiAiSm9obiBEb2UiLAogICJhZG1pbiI6IHRydWUKfQ

~~~

#### Signature

This is the last part of a JWT denoted by ccccc in the example. It's used to verify that the header and the payload have not been tampered with. This part
of a JWT is optional and if not implemented produces an unsigned JWT. It takes a secret, the encoded header, the encoded payload and the algorithm 
specified in the header to sign that. To use HMACSHA256 you use:

Example:
~~~

HMACSHA256(
  base64UrlEncode(header) + "." +
  base64UrlEncode(payload),
  secret)

~~~
